docs: Using Hooks (#1056)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/describing/use_hooks.md

# Use Hooks

Hooks are functions that isolate reusable parts of a component. Built-in `deephaven.ui` hooks allow you to manage state, cache values, synchronize with external systems, and much more. You can either use the built-in hooks or combine them to build your own.

## Built-in Hooks

> `deephaven.ui` has a large number of built-in hooks to help with the development of components. The full documentation for these can be found in the [`hooks` section](../hooks/overview.md) of the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`deephaven.ui` has a large number of built-in hooks to help with the development of components. More details can be found in the [`hooks` section](../hooks/overview.md) of the documentation.
```

1. Only call hooks at the top level.

Don’t call hooks inside loops, conditions, or nested functions. Instead, always use hooks at the top level of your `deephaven.ui` component function, before any early returns. By following this rule, you ensure that hooks are called in the same order each time a component renders.

2. Only call hooks from components and custom hooks

Don’t call hooks from regular Python functions. Instead, you can:

- Call Hooks from `@ui.component` decorated functions.
- Call hooks from custom hooks.

Following this rule ensures that all stateful logic in a component is clearly visible from its source code.

## Built-in Hooks

`deephaven.ui` has a large number of built-in hooks to help with the development of components. More details can be found in the [`hooks` section](../hooks/overview.md) of the documentation.

### Use State Hook

Call [`use_state`](../hooks/use_state.md) at the top level of your component to declare a state variable.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_counter():
    count, set_count = ui.use_state(0)
    return ui.button(f"Pressed {count} times", on_press=lambda: set_count(count + 1))

counter = ui_counter()
```

> The `use_state` hook takes an optional parameter that is the initial state. It initializes to `None` if this is omitted. The hook returns two values: a state variable and a `set` function that lets you update the state and trigger a re-render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `use_state` hook takes an optional parameter, the initial state. If this is omitted, it initializes to `None`. The hook returns two values: a state variable and a `set` function that lets you update the state and trigger a re-render.
```

### Use Memo Hook

Call [`use_memo`](../hooks/use_memo.md) to cache the result of a calculation, function, or operation. This is useful when you have a value that is expensive to compute and you want to avoid re-computing it on every render.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_todo_list(todos: list[str], filter: str):
    filtered_todos = ui.use_memo(
        lambda: [todo for todo in todos if filter in todo], [todos, filter]
    )

    return [
        ui.text(f"Showing {len(filtered_todos)} of {len(todos)} todos"),
        *[ui.checkbox(todo) for todo in filtered_todos],
    ]

result = ui_todo_list(["Do grocery shopping", "Walk the dog", "Do laundry"], "Do")
```

> The `use_memo` hook takes two parameters: a `callable` that returns a value and a list of dependencies. The value is computed once when dependencies are changed and then stored in the memoized value. The memoized value is returned on subsequent renders until the dependencies change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `use_memo` hook takes two parameters: a `callable` that returns a value and a list of dependencies. When dependencies are changed, the value is computed once and then stored in the memoized value. The memoized value is returned on subsequent renders until the dependencies change. The memoized value is returned on subsequent renders until the dependencies change.
```

```

The `use_effect` hook takes two parameters: a callable and a list of dependencies. The callable may return a function for cleanup.

### Use Callback Hook

Call [`use_callback`](../hooks/use_callback.md) to memoize a callback function. This prevents unnecessary re-renders when the dependencies of the callback have not changed.

```python
from deephaven import ui
import time

@ui.component
def ui_server():
    theme, set_theme = ui.use_state("red")

    create_server = ui.use_callback(lambda: {"host": "localhost"}, [])

    def connect():
        server = create_server()
        print(f"Connecting to {server}")
        time.sleep(0.5)

    ui.use_effect(connect, [create_server])

    return ui.view(
        ui.picker(
            "red",
            "orange",
            "yellow",
            label="Theme",
            selected_key=theme,
            on_change=set_theme,
        ),
        padding="size-100",
        background_color=theme,
    )

my_server = ui_server()
```

The `use_callback` hook takes two parameters: a callable and a list of dependencies. It returns a memoized callback. The memoized callback is returned on subsequent renders until the dependencies change.

> ## Rules for Hooks

Reviewer: should rules come before the types of hooks?

Rules
Built-in
Build your own

Author: Updated

Hooks are Python functions, but you need to follow two rules when using them.

> 1. Only Call Hooks at the Top Level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Only call hooks at the top level.
```

Don’t call hooks inside loops, conditions, or nested functions. Instead, always use hooks at the top level of your `deephaven.ui` component function, before any early returns. By following this rule, you ensure that hooks are called in the same order each time a component renders.

> 2. Only Call Hooks from Components and Custom Hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Only call hooks from components and custom hooks
```

Don’t call hooks from regular Python functions. Instead, you can:

- Call Hooks from `@ui.component` decorated functions.
- Call hooks from custom hooks.

Following this rule ensures that all stateful logic in a component is clearly visible from its source code.

> ## Building Your Own Hooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Build your own hooks
```

> When you have reusable logic involving one or more hooks, you may want to write a custom hook to encapsulate that logic. A hook is a Python function that follows these guidelines:

Reviewer: I'm at line 140 in a page about hooks, but here's a definition. The "A hook is a Python function..." should be in the intro? which then also supports my suggest to put rules as the second section

Author: Updated

- Hooks can call other hooks, but usage of hooks within hooks follows the same rules as using hooks within components.
- Custom hooks should start with the word `use` to indicate that is a hook and may contain component state and effects.

> ### Example: Extracting the use_server Hook

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Extracting the `use_server` hook
```
